<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII: Of Our Ride in Search of Rose</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Of Our Ride in Search of Rose</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>We rode in silence down the rough lane that leads from Baghill to Darrington, keeping along the stretch of grass at the wayside as much as possible, so that the sound of our horses’ feet might be deadened. Down the hill we went into Darrington, and past the crossroads, where two or three men still lingered at the door of the inn and watched us curiously as we sped along. All that time we had spoken no word, but both of us were full of rage and horror at the news brought to us by Belwether. I had ridden out at first half dazed at the strange tidings, comprehending nothing but that my dear love was in sore danger, and that I must go to her assistance. But as my head cleared with the long gallop I began to think of what the bad news meant. Rose had been entrapped and carried away. It was a snare meant for no good. Who had done it? Who had done it? Over and over again this question came into my head as we rode forward under the starlit sky.</p>
			<p>“Whose hand is this, Will?” asked Philip Lisle at last, just as we came in sight of the lights at Dale’s Field. “I did not know that my poor girl had an enemy⁠—nor that I had either, for that matter.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot understand it,” I answered, and said no more, knowing not what to say. And yet there was a suspicion in my mind that I might have spoken of to him if I had not felt some reluctance in coming to a decision about it. I tried to put it from me, hating even to think evil without due cause, but strive as I would the suspicion grew stronger, and at last I found myself thinking of it seriously.</p>
			<p>Captain Trevor⁠—was it his hand that had brought us all this wrong? Do what I would I could not help but suspect him. He had been so frank and courteous, and had seemed so gallant and true a cavalier, that it went through my heart to think wrong of him. And yet I knew the ways of some of those fine gentlemen of the Court, how they think that all is fair in love and war, and will stoop to such deceit to win a fair maiden as they would not condescend to for aught else. I knew, too, because of his own confession, that Captain Trevor had conceived a deep passion for Rose, and it seemed to me very possible that absence from her had so strengthened his feelings as to render him forgetful of honour or of aught else save a desire to win her for himself. But it was hard to believe, for I could not think that one who had experienced so much kindness at the hands of me and mine would repay us by such base ingratitude and black treachery. Where else, however, to look for an explanation of this strange matter I knew not. Of one thing only I was certain, namely, that whoever had thus compassed evil against me and my dear love should pay for it with his blood.</p>
			<p>The lights were being extinguished as we rode into the fold at Dale’s Field, for it was late, and we were always early to bed at our house. The window of the chamber occupied by Lucy and Rose was dark and cheerless, but there was a glow of light through the window of the kitchen, and we had barely knocked at the door before my mother opened it and gave us admittance.</p>
			<p>“My dear,” said she, holding me very close in her arms, for I had not seen her for some weeks, “my dear, we had not thought to see you at this time of night! It was only this afternoon that I sent you a letter by the hand of Master Belwether.”</p>
			<p>“Alas, mother!” I answered, “it is that very letter that hath brought us here.”</p>
			<p>It was nearly dark in the doorway, and she could not distinguish my companion’s face through the gloom, but when I spoke she turned towards him anxiously.</p>
			<p>“Who is it that is come with you, Will?” she said.</p>
			<p>“It is I, Mistress Dale,” answered Philip.</p>
			<p>“Master Lisle! Alas, I fear there is something wrong. Let us have a light, Will. I feared something when I heard your step at the door.”</p>
			<p>I struck a light from the flint that always hung by the hearth, while Philip tied up our horses at the door, and threw our rugs across their steaming backs. The light from the lamp fell on our three anxious faces as we gathered round the dying embers.</p>
			<p>“What is it, Will?” asked my mother.</p>
			<p>“It is this, dear mother. Here is Master Lisle alive and well, and hath had no hurt whatever of late, so that the men who have carried off Rose to see him have deceived both her and you.”</p>
			<p>She looked from me to him and from him to me, as if she could hardly understand what I had told her.</p>
			<p>“Alas, Master Lisle,” she said, “I have been very, very foolish⁠—but, indeed, what were we to think, for the men were so very grave and earnest? And then, again, they brought a letter from yourself, so that we could not choose but believe them.”</p>
			<p>“The letter, mother; let us see the letter.”</p>
			<p>“Why, by good chance, Rose left it behind her, though she had at first intended to carry it with her,” said my mother, “and Lucy put it away after she had gone. But indeed, Master Lisle, ’tis so like your own handwriting that you will not wonder we were deceived by it.”</p>
			<p>Nor did we when we had seen the letter, for it was very cleverly made to imitate Philip’s writing, so that we at once knew that whoever had hatched this foul plot was familiar with the man whose daughter it sought to injure. It was but a short letter, saying that Philip Lisle lay sick unto death at a day’s journey, and desired his daughter to go to him under care of the two trusty messengers who carried it.</p>
			<p>“And these,” said my mother, “were two decent-looking serving-men, one of whom told us that he had known Master Lisle a many years, and was with him at the time of his hurt, which had been gotten during a fight with the rebels on the borders of Derbyshire where he now lay dying. And they were both so full of pity for Rose, and made so many compassionate remarks concerning her father, that we had none of us any suspicion of them, but regarded them as being what they professed to be.”</p>
			<p>So now we knew all that my mother could tell us, and there was nothing for us to do but resolve upon some plan of action.</p>
			<p>“They have three days’ start of us,” said Philip sadly. “And the land is wide enough for them to have gone in many a different direction before we can have news of them. However, we must to horse, Will, and do what we can to find my poor girl.”</p>
			<p>“Which way shall we go?” I asked, feeling almost hopeless, so black did matters look.</p>
			<p>“It was nine in the morning when they started out,” said my mother, “and they rode southward, going towards Sheffield, whereabouts, they said, Master Lisle lay dying.”</p>
			<p>“Then towards Sheffield we must ride,” said Philip, “asking for tidings of them as we go along. Pray God we may be successful!”</p>
			<p>We did not tarry long at Dale’s Field, save to eat a hasty meal and to put some food in our saddlebags, and soon we were in the saddle again and hastening through the night along the Great North Road. The toll-keeper at Barnsdale Bar was hard and fast asleep, but we roused him at last and made inquiry of him as to the three travellers we sought. His brains were somewhat confused at first, but after a while he remembered the three we spoke of, and told us they had gone forward without saying aught to him of their destination. Thus far we were right, and so we continued until we came near Doncaster, several toll-bar men and innkeepers remembering Rose and the two messengers passing that way.</p>
			<p>“We are like to spend a good deal of time without result in Doncaster,” said Philip. “There are so many inns in the place, and when we have found the right one, there are so many various roads to choose from. How shall we find what road they have taken after passing through here, if, indeed, they have not turned aside before coming to the town?”</p>
			<p>But I thought and said that the men, whatever their design might be, would have taken Rose towards Sheffield for the reason that she knew whither they intended professedly to conduct her and would have become suspicious if they had turned their horses’ heads in any other direction. And my conclusions in this matter proved correct, for we had little difficulty in finding news of them at Doncaster, where they had rested to bait their horses, afterwards resuming their journey towards Sheffield by the road that leads past Conisbrough and Rotherham. Along this road, then, we continued our pursuit, inquiring at every inn and toll-bar for news, which we sometimes got and sometimes failed to procure.</p>
			<p>Now, it had been on my mind ever since leaving Dale’s Field to tell Philip Lisle of my suspicions respecting Captain Trevor, and I had only been held back from doing so by fear of unjustly coupling an honest man’s name with dishonourable conduct. But at last it seemed to me well to let Philip know of all that was in my mind, so when we stayed at Conisbrough to breathe our horses I took him aside and unbosomed myself, asking him to tell me candidly what he thought of the matter.</p>
			<p>“Alas, Will,” said he, “I know not what to think. I know little of this Trevor, except that he hath been a brave officer and was formerly much about the Court in London. But, as thou knowest, these gallants are not always to be trusted, however brave they may be in battle, and ’tis possible that he hath done this, more especially as you say he conceived some passion for Rose before he left you. Nay, I know not what to say. We can only push our journey forward.”</p>
			<p>So we went on towards Sheffield, now and then finding someone who remembered the passing of the three we sought. It was now afternoon, and our horses, which had been almost continually on the stretch since ten o’clock of the previous evening, were beginning to show signs of fatigue. We had not put them to any great amount of exertion, for we had spent much time in making inquiry at the roadside inns and toll-bars, but the day was exceedingly hot and they had had no proper rest or feed since leaving Pontefract Castle, where their rations had been none of the best for weeks past. At the next wayside inn, then, which stood halfway between Thrybergh and Rotherham, we drew rein and stabled our steeds, after which we entered the house to find some food for ourselves.</p>
			<p>We had hardly entered the kitchen of the inn, when I suddenly started with surprise to see Dennis Watson, seated in company with another man, who was evidently a cattle-drover, at a little table near the window. But as I knew that the Watsons did something in the way of cattle-dealing in those parts, I reflected that Dennis was probably there on his own business, and went forward to another part of the kitchen, taking no more notice of him than to give him a cold nod of my head. While Philip and myself were resting and drinking, he and the drover completed their business, and the latter, having received some money from Dennis, shortly bade us all good day and went out. Dennis continued to sit and stare at us, bestowing the greater part of his attention on Philip Lisle, and after a time, when we gave signs of moving, he came over to the table where we sat and spoke to me.</p>
			<p>“I would like to speak a word to you, Master Dale,” said he, bending over the table with his eyes fixed on mine.</p>
			<p>“You can speak,” I said, little caring what he had to say, and not desirous of having aught to do with him.</p>
			<p>“I don’t speak before strangers,” said he.</p>
			<p>“I have no secrets from my companion,” replied I. “And I would just as soon there was someone heard what we have to say, Master Watson.”</p>
			<p>His face grew dark when I said that, and he stood frowning at us both for a full minute before he spoke again.</p>
			<p>“As you like,” he said at last. “I only wished to say, Master Dale, that I am sorry for you.”</p>
			<p>“And for what?” said I sharply.</p>
			<p>“Why, because you have lost your sweetheart.”</p>
			<p>Now, it did not strike me at first that his words had any special significance, for I thought that he had heard that Rose was gone away and was simply taking occasion of the fact to sneer at me. So I said naught, but sat silent, looking, I dare say, very stupid and sullen.</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” he continued, “that you two gentlemen are in search of the young lady, and if you are, ’tis a pity they have three days’ start of you.”</p>
			<p>“They⁠—who?”</p>
			<p>“Mistress Rose and the gay gallant that your good mother nursed back to health. It had been better if she had let him die of his wound, Master Dale.”</p>
			<p>When he said this all the blood in my body rushed to my heart and thence to my head, and I felt a great singing about my ears as if I were going down in the midst of some whirlpool. And then I shouted, “Liar!” and would have leapt at Dennis and choked the sneering laugh that rose to his lips, but for Philip Lisle, who laid his hand upon me and restrained me forcibly.</p>
			<p>“Let be, Will, let be!” said Philip. “We will soon know whether he be a liar or not. Now, sir,” he continued, turning to Dennis, “I am the father of Mistress Rose Lisle, and must ask you to explain yourself further. Where is it that you have seen my daughter, and in whose company?”</p>
			<p>“Why, Master Lisle,” answered Dennis, “I do not know that I am bound to explain matters to you. However, I am no liar, as Master Dale there would make out. It would be better for him if I were.”</p>
			<p>“Go on, sir, go on,” said Philip.</p>
			<p>“Well, then, here I am in this part of the land, buying hogs, as is my custom at this time o’ year, as Will Dale there knows. Three days ago I was on the high-road ’twixt here and Sheffield, when I saw four travellers approach, two of whom rode in front while the other two brought up the rear. I thought I recognised Mistress Rose Lisle as one of the first, and slipped amongst the trees to watch. Mistress Rose it was, and with her, laughing and jesting, the gay cavalier who stayed so long at Dale’s Field. The others were decent-looking serving-men of a certain age.”</p>
			<p>“If you met such on the road, sir, they passed here. The host will remember them. Call him in.”</p>
			<p>The host did remember such a company. Nay, he remembered more; the young lady came there with the serving-men, and was there met by the cavalier, all four then proceeding southward.</p>
			<p>“I am no liar, Master Dale,” said Dennis.</p>
			<p>We went outside to our horses. What I felt I cannot describe. My heart and brain were on fire. I knew not what to think nor what to do.</p>
			<p>“What do you think, what do you think!” I cried to Philip when we were out of the house. “For God’s sake say something to me.”</p>
			<p>“My poor lad, what can I say? Only this, Will, that my dear girl would do naught against honour. She is the victim of some foul plot. Listen. This Trevor hath a country estate in the north of Derbyshire. Let us push on through Sheffield and see if we can find him there.”</p>
			<p>So we paid our reckoning and rode away in the summer evening, and my heart was as heavy as lead within my breast.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
