<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Of Philip Lisle and His Good Horse Caesar</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Of Philip Lisle and His Good Horse Caesar</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“I am going to find primroses,” said Rose, picking up her basket.</p>
			<p>“I know where they grow,” said I. “Come along, and I will show you the best places.”</p>
			<p>And so we went through the wood, gay as the spring air that breathed upon us, and talking childlike about ourselves and our fathers and of such matters as children best love to dwell on. And presently the shyness wore off and we ran along hand in hand amongst the trees, and I showed her where I had climbed the crags for the jackdaw’s nest, and took her to the bank of the Went at the place where you can throw a stone across five times in one cast, and from thence we wandered down stream to the mill, where the miller and his men peered at us through a mist of dusty whiteness, and the Went ran howling through the great wheel and fled away in thick circles of spume. And I told her about our farm of Dale’s Field, and how many horses we had, and how many cattle and sheep, with many particulars concerning Dumpling the pony, and Jacob Trusty, and Timothy Grass, and other matters upon which I loved to talk. She, in return, told me that she lived in a town a long, long way off, as indeed it must have been, seeing that it was but an hour’s ride from London itself. As for mother, or sister, or brother, she had none, nor ever remembered having, nor any other relation save her father, who was called Philip Lisle, and had business that took him much from home. And at Barnet, which was where they lived, they stayed with Mistress Goodfellow, who, said Rose, was an old woman, and sometimes cross-grained. But her father, she said, was the most admirable man that ever lived, for he could sing and dance, and play music upon several instruments, and tell stories and legends, so that when he was at home they were as happy as the day is long. But sometimes, she said, he was away a long time, and she was lonely until he came again, bringing her various rare things which he had found in his travels, and then they were happy once more. And now and then he took her with him when the weather was fine, she riding before him on his great horse, and he telling her stories of the fine houses they passed, or the dark woods through which they rode. Much did she tell me, too, about her father’s horse, which understood him when he talked to it as if it had been a Christian, and would follow him about, and ate bread and sugar out of his hand, and had more than once saved his life, though how she did not know.</p>
			<p>In discourse like this Rose Lisle and I passed the afternoon, and I forgot the ache in my head in listening to her conversation. But as it drew near suppertime I was forced to leave her, and said goodbye to her with much regret, and she went down the lane into Wentbridge while I climbed the valley slope and went across the meadows home. And though I told Jacob Trusty about my tumble from the elm-tree, yet I said nothing either to him or to my sister Lucy about Rose Lisle. Only I thought much about her, and wished that she was going to stay in our neighbourhood, so that Lucy and myself might take her with us when we went birds’-nesting, or blackberrying, or nutting.</p>
			<p>Upon the next afternoon I set off again to the old sheepfold, determined to climb the elm with success. But I left Lucy at home, not being minded to let anyone see me tumble down again. However, as fortune would have it, the stormcock escaped once more; for I had no sooner got into the woods above Wentbridge Mill than I met Rose Lisle, who was once more gathering the primroses that were now springing up in every nook and corner. And so through the woods we went, as on the previous day, and rambled in and out all the afternoon until we came to the mill again, where we stood beside the stream and watched the bits of stick and twig race by.</p>
			<p>While we stood there I became aware of someone calling to us, and looking across the stream saw a man on horseback, at sight of whom Rose raised a glad cry.</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis my father!” said she. “Will Dale, ’tis my father. Let us run round by the mill-bridge.”</p>
			<p>But I saw that the man was going to leap his horse across the stream, which is there about twenty feet in width. And calling to us to stand where we were, he turned his horse about and brought him at the Went, and the great brute tucked up his thighs and came clear across with a motion like a swallow flying. The man gave him an encouraging pat as he dismounted, and throwing the bridle loose, took Rose in his arms and lifted her up and kissed her.</p>
			<p>“Well, my princess!” said he. “Here is thy father back again, safe and sound once more. Thy cheeks are the rosier, my beauty, for thy little outing.”</p>
			<p>And then he kissed her again on both cheeks, and I saw his eyes sparkle as if it were a great delight to him to see Rose again. He was a tall, fine man, this Philip Lisle, and looked like the sort that order and command other men naturally. His greatness was not of the sort that I was familiar with, for he was not like my father⁠—tall and broad and big in every way, but rather slender and elegantly fashioned, and more like a willow-wand than an oak-tree. Nevertheless, there was that in his face which gave an impression of power; and I could not help noticing that his hands, which were very white and shapely, were also tense as bands of steel when he grasped anything. Looking at him I no longer wondered that Rose was dark, for Philip Lisle’s hair and moustachios were like jet, and the eyes were black as the delicate eyebrows above them. He was dressed very much finer than most in our parts, and looked, in fact, like one of the gay Cavaliers that sometimes rode by our gates along the Great North Road. His horse, too, was finely caparisoned, and there were two pistols peeping out of the holsters on each side of the saddle, which shone so in the sunlight that I was sure they were fashioned of silver.</p>
			<p>“And who is this bonny lad?” said Philip Lisle, turning to me, with Rose still perched on his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“It is William Dale, father, and he lives over the bend of the hill yonder,” said Rose, while I stood and stared at the man’s handsome face and fine clothes, and clean lost my tongue for admiration; “and he has shown me where the primroses grow best, and where the birds’-nests are, and where he fell down the crags from the jackdaw’s nest.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, a Dale? Lad, I should have known thee. The Dales were always big men, as I have heard, though I never saw but two⁠—thy grandfather and thy father. Thou wilt be a big man like them, Will.”</p>
			<p>“Does my father know you then, sir?” I asked, being surprised to hear him speak thus familiarly of my family.</p>
			<p>He laughed and stroked his horse’s neck, the creature having come up to him and pushed his nose under Philip Lisle’s arm.</p>
			<p>“There are few, lad, that do not know me. Howeever⁠—But what thinkest thou of my horse, Will? Is’t not a beauty? Ye have no horse in all the three Ridings like this. Caesar his name is, for he is the emperor of the horse race, as Caesar was of the human. However, he, too, like Caesar, may fall a victim to treachery. But thy master will be there, old friend, will not he? Yea, whenever death comes, let it be red death, or black death, in bed or afield, it will find thee and me together.”</p>
			<p>The horse lifted its head and whinnied, and pushed its nose against the man’s face, and I stood dumb to see the marvellous understanding between them. For it seemed to comprehend exactly what he said, which was what I had never seen in a horse before, save that they learn and obey the few words of command by which men make known their desires.</p>
			<p>“But what talk I of death,” said Philip Lisle, “with two such rosy faces before me? Children, would ye like a ride on horse Caesar’s back? Will, climb into my saddle, and I will put Rose behind thee. So, put thy feet in the stirrup-leathers. Thy legs are too short yet to reach the stirrups, though thou wilt quickly mend that matter. And now have no fear, but hold thy bridle tight; and Rose, my princess, cling firm to Will’s waist; and thou, Caesar, remember what thou carriest, and be on thy best behaviour. And now, off!”</p>
			<p>And away we went over the ground on Caesar’s back at a swift canter, and yet travelling as safely as if we had been in an easy-chair. For I had but to keep my knees well pressed to the saddle, as my father had taught me, and Rose had but to circle my waist with her dainty arms, and beyond that we had no trouble to take. But never before or since have I crossed a horse which went over the ground as that did. For it was like the motion of a greyhound, which runs straight and smooth and swift, and makes never a sound as the soft feet touch the ground and fly onward. And so we circled down the bank and turned, and came round again to where Philip Lisle stood. And he lifted us down and patted Caesar’s neck.</p>
			<p>“Thou hast never ridden horse like that, Will, eh?” said he. “Ah, this horse hath soul in him, and mind. Well, we must hence. Rose, I am going to take thee home. We shall sleep at Retford tonight, and so say goodbye to Will Dale.”</p>
			<p>She came up to me where I stood silent and sad, and lifted up her little red rosebud of a mouth to kiss me. And, why I know not, I was so moved, that I put my arm about her neck and kissed her again and again, and then turned and cast down my eyes, and, I dare say, blushed as red as any June rose.</p>
			<p>“Nay, lad,” said Philip Lisle, “be not ashamed. Alack, I wonder if ye will kiss next time ye meet? Who knows?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, father,” cried Rose, “bring me again to see Will.”</p>
			<p>“Wouldst like to see Rose again, Will?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir, very much,” said I.</p>
			<p>“Then thou shalt, but when I cannot say. Nevertheless, thou shalt. And now farewell, Will. Stay, there is a guinea for thee. Put it in thy breeches pocket, lad.”</p>
			<p>He swung into the saddle, and, stooping down, lifted Rose before him and put one arm round her. And again he cried, “Farewell, Will Dale,” and again Rose kissed the tips of her fingers to me, and he called to Caesar, and the horse started forward like an arrow out of a bow, and away they went along the valley, and Rose’s voice came to me on the wind, crying, “Goodbye, dear Will, goodbye!” And then they were out of sight, and I turned away and climbed the hill, and went straight to Jacob Trusty, who was bedding down his twelve fat oxen for the night.</p>
			<p>“Jacob,” said I, when I made sure that we were all alone in the straw shed, “Jacob, did you ever hear of a man called Philip Lisle?”</p>
			<p>“Ay, marry,” said Jacob, sticking his fork into a great heap of straw, and lifting the latter on his back with a prodigious grunt. “Ay, marry, have I! What, man, and so hast thou. Did I never tell ’ee of Black Phil?”</p>
			<p>“What, Black Phil the highwayman? Is he the same as Philip Lisle?”</p>
			<p>“Od’s mercy, ay, and no other! Ay, Philip Lisle he was called once upon a time, but now Black Phil, by reason of his dark face. Natheless, ’tis a gentleman born, and hath rank and blood. But what matter⁠—he is a highwayman, and must finally swing on gallow tree. For look ’ee, William, boy, as you go through the world you will see one thing⁠—namely, that if a man give himself to evil courses he may prosper for awhile, but ’tis the gallows in the end that rewardeth him, even as it saith in Holy Writ.”</p>
			<p>And Jacob went down the fold with his straw, and into the beast-place, and there made such a rattling and shouting amongst the fat oxen, that the whole place shook again. Which done, he came leisurely across the fold, picking up a fork full of straw here and there, and coming into the straw-shed again, continued his discourse.</p>
			<p>“This trade of highwayman, William, boy, is a parlous one, and many a man that hath gone into it hath oft wished he could get out on’t as easy as he went in. For look you, lad, your highwayman, though he ride a good horse and wear fine clothes, doth neither at his own expense, but rather at the cost of them whom he robbeth. Likewise he is against the law, which is a bad matter for any man. Howbeit, I had liefer be robbed by a highwayman than a lawyer, for your lawyer laughs in your face while he turns out your pockets, but your highwayman is as courtly as any fine court-madam. These things have I noticed, William, boy, in going through the world; for, though I be of this parish born and bred, I have travelled, yea, I have travelled even to the city of Lincoln, and again as far as Brough Hill in the county of Westmoreland, which last is as heathen a land as ever man knew, and full of high mountains and deep precipices. But as for this Black Phil, now⁠—’tis a good heart, and the poor folk do think a deal of him. For if he rob a lord, or maybe a bishop, riding along the road in his own carriage, what doth he do but gallop off to some place where there is a hard winter or griping times, and there share the money? So that there is not a poor man ’twixt York and London that would not give Black Phil shelter and help if he were pursued by King’s officers. However, he hath not ridden in these parts this five year. And now, William, lad, go beg a mug of small beer from thy good mother, for my mouth is as dry as any limekiln.”</p>
			<p>When I had carried Jacob his mug of small ale, I left him and went and walked by myself in the garden. And there I thought over the events of the past two days, which had been more astonishing than any that had ever come into my young life previously. I had seen a real highwayman, and had talked with him, and he spoke like other men, and was habited like a gentleman, and was, I was sure, a man of kind heart, by the way he caressed his daughter and spoke to me. And I felt very sorry for Philip Lisle, and wondered what little Rose would do when they hanged her father, as they would do in the end, because Jacob Trusty said so. However, I decided that in that case I would beg my father to let Rose live with us, knowing that she and Lucy would agree well. And I further thought that in that case Philip Lisle would leave me his horse Caesar, with the two silver pistols and fine saddle, but I did not wish the King’s officers to catch him for all that.</p>
			<p>Now, while I walked round the garden with my hands in my pockets, I found my fingers clinging round Philip Lisle’s guinea, and fell a-wondering what I should do with it. I was very shy of speaking to anyone about my two new friends, and I knew that if I showed my money I should have to tell how I had come by it. It was not probable, I knew, that I should be allowed to keep the guinea if my mother knew whence it came. But, though I set no store by money, having no occasion for it, I was not minded to give up my guinea, for Philip Lisle had spoken kindly to me in giving it, and it might be that it really was his own to give. So I went into the house, and found a little leaden box which Jacob Trusty had once bestowed upon me, and I wrapped up the guinea within a sheet of paper, inside which I placed a primrose that Rose Lisle had pinned in my coat that afternoon, and I put the paper in the leaden box, and fetched a spade and dug a hole in the corner of my own patch of garden, and buried the leaden box two feet deep, and put stones above and below it, and stamped the earth well in, and so hid out of sight the connecting link ’twixt me and Philip Lisle.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
